met in order for any kind of sort of
significant easing of the lockdown
it does require falling death rates and
infection rates we've had the latest
figures from public health England
concerning the numbers of people who've
died it's up 377 down from yesterday's
400-plus figure it is that the kind of
number that is gonna signal to the
government that they can move forward in
easing
yes the number itself isn't necessarily
the most important and let's go to
Downing Street now and get the prime
minister leading the briefing before I
set out our next steps in the fight
against the coronavirus let me update
you on the latest data three million
nine hundred eighteen thousand and
seventy nine tests for coronavirus have
now been carried out in the UK including
119 thousand five hundred and
eighty-seven tests carried out yesterday
two hundred and sixty nine thousand one
hundred and twenty seven people have
tested positive and that's an increase
of 1887 cases since yesterday eight
thousand five hundred and sixty people
are in hospital with coronavirus down
11% from 9607 this time last week and
sadly of those tested positive for
coronavirus across all settings of
37,000 837 have now died that's an
increase of 377 fatalities since
yesterday and we are with their friends
and family in mourning as you know we've
set five tests which must be met before
adjusting the lockdown I've set out on
the first slide it's vital that these
tests are met before any changes are
made because we must not risk all the
hard work and sacrifice of the British
people at all times were informed by the
data and
about the spread of the virus and the
impact of the measures taken so far I
will now take you through our latest
assessment of progress against each of
the five tests can we have the next
slide please
our first test is to protect the NHS's
ability to cope so that we're confident
that we're able to provide sufficient
critical care and specialist treatment
right across the UK at the start of the
outbreak there was significant concern
that the NHS would not be able to cope
and that turned out not to be the case
thanks to the heroic efforts of everyone
who works for the NHS and the heroic
efforts of the British people to contain
this virus the data showed that on the
26th of May 475 people were admitted to
hospital in England with coronavirus
that's down from a peak of 3121 on a
single day on the 2nd of April on the
27th of May 11 % of mechanical
ventilator beds in the UK were occupied
by patients with coronavirus and that's
down from a peak of 41 percent on the
10th of April and this significant
progress means that we are meeting the
first test can I have a next slide
please
our second test is to see a sustained
and consistent fall in the daily deaths
from Kovan 19:00 so we are confident
that we've moved beyond the peak as
measured by a 7-day rolling average the
UK daily death rate now stands at 256
down from a peak of 943 on the 14th of
April while every death is one to many
it is now the case that there has been a
sustained and consistent fall in the
daily death rate and so the second test
is being met next slide please
our third test is to receive reliable
information reliable data from from
saij showing that the rate of infection
the number of people catching kovat is
decreasing to manageable levels across
the board and in the last seven days an
average of two thousand three hundred
and twelve new cases were confirmed with
a positive test that's down from a peak
of five thousand and sixty six in the
first week of May based on the various
data available the government is
satisfied that the third test is being
met and in a moment Patrick will tell us
more about other methods of measuring
infections including the are number can
I have the next slide please
our fourth test is that we must be
confident that the range of operational
challenges including in testing capacity
and personal protective equipment are in
hand with supply able to meet future
demand I fully acknowledge the
difficulties on testing and PPE that we
have faced since the start of the
outbreak it's been immensely frustrating
but we are now making progress yesterday
we carried out 119 thousand 587 tests
compared to around twelve thousand at
the start of April testing capacity has
now increased to 160 1214 a day we have
now signed over a hundred new deals with
PPE suppliers around the world here in
the UK thanks to the efforts of Lord
iton and his team and the brilliance of
domestic manufacturers we've signed
contracts for over two billion items of
PPE including face masks visors guns and
aprons were that all satisfied that the
fourth test is being met and we can
start to rebuild stocks although we
recognize there may be some settings
that require
and restocking on occasion can I have
the next slide please our fifth and
final test is that we must be confident
that any adjustments to the current
measures will not risk a second peak of
infections that overwhelms the NHS I'm
very grateful to the chief scientific
adviser and the chief medical officer
for their assessments of the measures
I'm about to set out on schools retail
and social contact although all parts of
the UK are moving in the same direction
it is important to note that health is
devolved and different parts of the UK
are quite properly moving at different
speeds this package has been carefully
designed so that we can ease the burdens
of the lockdown while expecting to keep
that are below one I cannot and will not
throw away all the gains we have made
together and so the changes we are
making are limited and cautious it's
thanks to the cautionary shown so far
that all five tests are being met that's
not my achievement or the government's
achievement it is your achievement it's
only possible thanks to your resolve and
dedication to our national purpose to
overcome this virus so the result is we
can move forward with adjusting the
lockdown in England on Monday first as I
set out on Sunday we will now reopen
schools to more children closing schools
has deprived children of their education
and as so often it is the most
disadvantaged pupils who risk being
hardest hit on Monday we will start to
put this right in a safe way by
reopening nurseries and other earlier
settings and reception year 1 and year 6
in primary schools a fortnight later on
the 15th of June secondary schools will
begin to provide some face-to-face
contact time fears ten and twelve second
we will also start to reopen shops as we
restart our economy and will begin on
Monday with outdoor retail and car
showrooms where social distancing is
generally easier and a fortnight later
on the 15th of June we intend to reopen
other non-essential retail but only
provided the five tests are still being
met and shops have been made Co vide
secured lastly I know the toll the
lockdown has taken on families and
friends who have been unable to see each
other so from Monday we will allow up to
six people to meet outside provided
those from different households
continues strictly to observe social
distancing rules by staying two metres
apart at the moment as you know people
can meet in parks but not in private
Gardens and this was a cautious first
step but we know that there is no
difference in the health risk so we will
now allow people to meet in gardens and
other private outdoor spaces these
changes mean that friends and family can
start to meet their loved ones perhaps
seeing both parents at once or both
grandparents at once and I know that for
many people this will be a long-awaited
and joyful moment but I must stress that
to control the virus everyone needs to
stay alert at responsibly strictly
observe social distancing rules and stay
two metres apart from those you do not
live with minimising contact with others
is still the best way to prevent
transmission
you should also try to avoid seeing
people from too many households in quick
succession so that we can avoid the risk
of quick transmission from lots of
different families and continue to
control the virus and it remains the
case that people should not be inside
the homes of their friends and families
not inside the homes of your friends and
families unless it is to access the
garden to get to the garden I should add
that at this stage I am afraid that
those who have been asked to to to
shield themselves should continue to do
so and I want to say to those extremely
clinically vulnerable people who are now
being shielded that I do understand how
difficult this has been for you
especially and I want to thank you for
all the efforts you have gone to because
your actions have helped the NHS to cope
we're looking carefully at how we can
make your life easier and how we can
better support you and we want to say
more on that soon I want to reassure
everyone that we can make all of the
changes I have outlined in a safe way
we know that children and particularly
young children are much less likely to
be seriously affected by the virus we
know that if shops enforce social
distancing as required by our kovat
secure guidelines then the virus is less
likely to spread
and crucially we know that transmission
of the virus is far lower outdoors so we
can confidently allow more interaction
outside I understand that people will
have questions as how to do as to how to
do all of this safely and we will
publish guidance on these changes to
help people to help you make the most of
them now I know inevitably that there
may be some anomalies or apparent
inconsistencies in these rules and
clearly
we're proposing is still just a fraction
of the social interaction each of us
would normally enjoy I know many of you
will find this frustrating and I'm sorry
about that but I'm afraid that is
unavoidable giving them given the nature
of the invisible enemy that we are
fighting it's a complex problem and
we're asking for everyone's patience as
we work through it together we will
inevitably not get everything right
first time but I must ask everyone to
remember that it's the same patience the
same hard work and sacrifices of the
British people in lockdown that have got
us so far and allowed us to make the
progress and the progress that we have
by protecting the NHS getting us through
the peak and getting this virus under
control we are able to deliver all of
the adjustments and easing of
restrictions I have set out today these
adjustments are most of those we set out
to achieve in step two of our road map
of our road map and we have also been
able to have them in place by June the
first as we had hoped and there's no
doubt that we're making progress and I'm
hopeful that in the coming weeks we may
be able to do more because obviously
while protecting the health and safety
of the public is and must always be our
number-one priority we must also work to
restart our economy and society so as
many people as possible can begin
returning to their way of life but I
want to reaffirm that fundamental
commitment to the British people that
all the steps we have taken and will
take our conditional they are
conditional on all the data and all the
scientific advice and it is that
scientific advice which will help us
to judge what we're doing is safe and I
have to warn you in all frankness as we
go forwards that there will be further
local outbreaks so we will monitor what
is going on very carefully we will put
on the brakes as required and where
necessary we will re impose measures and
it's very important to be clear about
that
upfront and as before we will see how
these new changes are working and we'll
look at the r-value and the number of
new infections before taking any further
steps so we can ensure that anything we
do does not risk a second peak that
could overwhelm the NHS and yesterday as
I hope you you all know we took a huge
step forward that will enable us to keep
making progress in returning our lives
to as close to normal as possible while
continuing to control the Vice the virus
and isolate any new outbreaks and that
is through our new NHS tests and trace
program in England the Scottish
Government has established test and
protect and Welsh Northern Irish schemes
will follow next week and I'll now show
you a short video that explains our NHS
tests and trace works in England and
what we all need to do to play our part
the government is doing all it can to
find and develop a vaccine or treatment
for coronavirus
but how do we return to normal life for
as many people as possible while the
surface goes on the answer is the new
NHS test and tray service here's how it
works if you have covered 19 symptoms
you must self isolate immediately and
get a test then you'll know for sure if
you and your household must continue to
self isolate if you test positive for
covert 19:00 you'll be are either online
or on the phone about your recent close
contact someone you've been within two
meters of for 15 minutes and places you
visited the people you've been in
contact with will then be told self
isolate for 14 days tests and trace
works because it allows localized
patterns of infection to be detected and
contained so the vast majority of people
can return to a more normal life but we
need everyone to play their part if you
have symptoms self isolate get tested
and also self isolate if you are told to
buy an NHS contact tracer
thanks for a hand opener to battery
thank you may have the first line please
just to update you on where we are in
terms of the are the current value is
somewhere between point seven and point
nine
so it remains close to one it may be
very close to one in some areas and just
to remind you of what that means if the
are is at one it means that the epidemic
stays at the same level it is now the
same numbers above one it's growing
below one it's shrinking numbers are
coming down at the moment but they're
not coming down fast and the are stays
close to one next slide please
to put that into context of numbers
these are the numbers from the most
recent Office of National Statistics
survey which is a household survey
taking samples from now over 8,000
households and 17,000 or so people
nearly I think 18,000 people now looking
at the number of infections so the
proportion of people over the past
couple of weeks with kovat infection is
not point to four percent of the
population as estimated from this survey
that means that somewhere in the order
of a hundred and thirty thousand people
have kovat infection the second
important number is the number of new
infections the so called incidence the
number of new infections is estimated to
be roughly one in a thousand per week it
means that 54,000 new cases are
occurring every week so somewhere around
eight or so thousand per day that is not
a low number so it's worth remembering
that we still have a significant burden
of infection we are still seeing new
infections every day but quite a
significant rate
and the r is close to one that means
there is not a lot of room to do things
and things need to be done cautiously
step by step and monitored and the test
and trace system needs to be effective
in order to manage that so that's where
we are as of today and there's one last
figure on this slide which is an
estimate of the number of people across
the country who might have had the
infection as measured by an antibody
presence and that's something in the
order of six percent so it's still the
case that the vast majority of us have
not had the infection and this is a
virus for which all of us are
susceptible so this set of figures urges
caution in terms of the measures we take
how we take them and how we monitor them
thank you thanks very much
Patrick can we go now to our questions
from the public first and then from the
media from the public we're going to Jay
in Horsham I'm a 33 year old full-time
working mum who is currently in the
shielded community and I feel as if we
have been forgotten
I'm currently shielding with my ten year
old son and I've had to stop him from
staying at his dad's I would like to get
visibility on how you were going to
approach loosening the lockdown that
they're clinically extremely vulnerable
and how you are going to aid us in this
transition let me let me first of all
say Jay that I feel very very
sympathetic to all those more than a
million people who are in your position
in this country that clinically
extremely vulnerable I know how tough it
has been I'm sure that most of us can
think of friends or relatives who are in
the same position Jay we want to release
you from your your captivity your your
lockdown as fast as we as we possibly
can but and that's why we continue to be
extremely vigilant in our approach and
what we're announcing today is very very
cautious we we are taking some some some
tentative steps forward
both of the education and with the
economy and a little bit with family and
friends but we need to get that are down
we need to get that infection rate down
so that je everybody in who's being
shielded now can can can be released but
I assure you were working as hard and as
fast as we can one of the Chris's
anything you want to add that we can say
to people are inject in Jai's position
well I mean days question which of
course is important to very many people
he's exactly right as the rates of
infection come down and it's the rate
it's not the are for this it's the
number of infections in the community
the risk to people who are at higher
risk
so the shielded but also people who are
in other vulnerable groups is decreasing
and we will get to a stage we hope
relatively soon where the absolute risk
of people has got down to low enough
level it would be possible in stages for
people to leave shielding but fully
appreciate the very considerable
constraints it's put on people and the
very big burden of loneliness and other
problems which have gone with it which
is the reason why now that the peak has
passed we need to plot a path I think
hopefully in the very near future for
people so that they can J like you and
others come out from the shielding but
still remain very cautious because as
the Patrick was pointing out as the
Prime Minister was pointing out in his
remarks the number of infections remains
high and the risk has not gone away it
has decreased substantially and we hope
through it will continue to decrease but
there is still a risk and people are
going to have to do this in stages
thanks very much Chris anything go ahead
Patrick on that no thank you
let's go to to Carol in Sunderland Carol
asked if localized lock downs are
implemented due to local outbreaks what
measures will the government be putting
into place with those unable to go to
work and therefore who would be
potentially temporarily who potentially
lose their income will there be a
compensation scheme implemented
and Carol what I can what I can
certainly tell you is that we will do
everything we can to support those who
are obviously the furlough schemes
remain in place the all the loans that
were giving to business the bounce back
loans the support for for the
self-employed you'll be hearing more
about but those who face temperately
losing their their income as a result of
this will be helped I just remind you of
what we've done to increase universal
credit and other and other benefits but
clearly what we want to avoid is is too
many local outbreaks too many people
having to go into into into quarantine
and and that is why it's so vital that
we all observe these measures and and
drive those those numbers down is there
any I but you know we will look up where
where we have to to crack down and where
we have to implement local measures to
to to stop an outbreak we will make sure
that we look after our local people
remember the basic mantra that I've
tried to use nobody should be penalized
in this epidemic for doing the right
thing if you're doing the right thing if
you're being forced to stay at home you
should not be penalized can we go to
Laura Coons burg of the BBC Laura Thank
You Prime Minister
Darren police have said this afternoon
they would have sent Dominic Cummings
home if they'd found him in Bernard
castle if one of your most senior team
wasn't paying proper attention to the
rules why should anyone else and to the
doctor as if I mean is that the kind of
example that you want people to follow
well Laura first of all can I say I've
said quite a lot on this matter already
and I also noticed that the Durham
Police said was that the they were going
to take
no action and that the matter was closed
and I intend to to draw a line under the
matter as I as I said I think yesterday
to the to the parliamentary liaison
committee they're not taking any action
I am I intend to draw a line hundred and
all I couldn't say and I know that
you've asked Chris and Patrick but I'm
going to interpose myself if I may and
protect them from what I think would be
an on an unfair and unnecessary attempt
to ask a political question is very very
important that our medical officers and
scientific advisors do not get dragged
into what I think most people will
recognize is fundamentally a political
argument and if that's all right Laura
and could we go now to Robert Peston
with my TV hello just to be clear I
don't think this is a wholly political
question Prime Minister I mean a number
of scientific advisors to the sage
committee have said that the behavior of
your chief adviser in not going into
quarantine at home risks more people not
complying with the social distancing
rules and I think it's pretty reasonable
to ask so Patrick and Chris witty
whether they fear that compliance with
these rules will be reduced as a result
of this second quick question yesterday
Prime Minister you said you would ask
Sir Patrick and Chris witty to review
whether the appropriate social distance
is 2 metres rather than 1 meter and most
businesses would much rather have 1
meter distance pubs and restaurants many
of them will be bussed at 2 meters is
this something that's a Patrick and
Chris which we are looking at when will
we know the answer whether it's safe to
go to 1 meter Robert thanks a lot and
look I just could repeat the point I've
I made just now it is very important
that our advisors are protected from
being dragged into political
controversies in just to repeat the
thing I've been saying in the last few
days you know
we want to get some very clear and
simple messages across to the British
public what they what they want to hear
is what we're doing to tackle
coronavirus and what the plan is we've
announced a huge amount today I think
people need to focus on those messages
and if I may respectively so I think
that the rest of it is you know you
yourself argue that it's a it's a
distraction one insofar as that is that
is true let's let's crack on with our
program and getting our messages across
and on your on your point about the
social distancing distance and the and
the and whether it should be 2 meters or
or less i I really hand thread over to
to Patrick and and and Chris well I'm
happy to to answer that the the the
evidence that we got and the that will
be published some of its out and some of
its coming out very shortly is looking
at the distance that droplets and exhale
droplets and aerosol might travel and to
meters is a distance beyond which things
are very safe that you can see it
dropping off quite quickly but of course
it's not an absolute two meters is
beyond two meters are safe and slightly
less is is not safe there's a graduation
across that and so roughly at a meter
it's somewhere between 10 and 30 times
more risky than at 2 meters what we've
done in the paper is lay out clearly
what the sorts of things are that you
could do to mitigate against those risks
so we've not said it's 2 metres or
nothing we've said this is the
scientific evidence that explains why 2
metres is a distance beyond which things
are safer and we've also laid out what
the sort of things are that reduce those
risks so for example being back to back
or side to side and in some cases
wearing face coverings and in some cases
looking at ventilation there are many
other measures you could look at so this
is not a policy because we don't make
policy we give science advice and we've
laid out what the science advice
is from that policy decisions can be
made and we've laid out a series of
considerations that might allow people
to think about what those policies
should and could be Thanks so Chris
could I add an additional point on that
which is if we want to really reinforce
the point that if people are meeting in
these new slightly relaxed slightly
relaxed social distancing guidelines in
terms of meeting outdoors it is
essential that people maintain two
metres and that is really important this
risk has not gone away
and if people are outdoors and stay at
two meters very very very very small not
absolutely zero under any circumstances
but that keeping that distance of people
in different households is essential and
the second point I'd want to make on
this is about the the test and trace the
NHS test and trace system if you do
maintain two metres distance and the
contacts you've had turn out
subsequently have coronavirus you will
not be counted as a contact and you will
not have to hurt self isolate if on the
other hand you don't then actually if
they get coronavirus a you might get it
and B because you might have got it it
is likely that you will have to self
isolate so the two metres distancing
helps individuals both protect their own
risk and also means that they will not
be contacts for people who actually have
had a coronavirus episode thanks very
much Chris can we go to Sam coats of Sky
News but first a question - Patrick
valance and Chris Witte are you entirely
comfortable with the Prime Minister
telling you that you can't answer
questions about Dominic Cummings that if
you can't give a verbal answer a nod or
a shake of the head will suffice and is
there anything else the Prime Minister
has told you not to answer on and Prime
Minister today the launch of tracking
trace could mean that at any point you
might get a call from someone on behalf
of the government telling you to
quarantine for 14 days can you tell the
nation is this a no ifs no buts
instruction that you must follow
whatever your childcare arrangements
however important you think your job
it's it's very important well let me I
do you want to answer the first question
by any semaphore or otherwise why I can
assure you that the desire not to get
pulled into politics is far stronger on
the part of a Patrick and me than it is
in the in the Prime Minister's sure
thanks civil servant I'm political I
don't want to get involved in politics
at all good
well I unfortunately I have no choice
but let me but let me let me just say on
the on the on the the track and trace
thing Sam what we're saying to the
country is if you get contacted and
you're told that you've been well within
2 metres of someone for 50 minutes and
the your contact of a coronavirus
patient someone who's tested positive
then yes you must self isolate and I
know that that is is going to be
hardened it is going to be difficult for
people but do not forget that this is
the way to beat it we really will crack
it with this test and trace system and
as it develops as it progresses I think
that it will be indispensable to our
success against the virus and people
should think of it as the price that a
small minority hopefully a small
minority are going to have to pay for
the eventual liberation of the of the
whole of the of the country 66 million
people and enabling us to begin our
lives again and to see each other again
in the way that though we will want to
do so so that's that's the nature of the
the instruction at a point has just said
I think it's important for people to
understand why we're asking people to do
this as well as what we're asking to do
with both are obviously very important
and why is that this virus unfortunately
is infectious for two possibly three
days before people get symptoms and
maximally infectious just around the
time they get symptoms and so therefore
picking up the people who actually might
have infections are much higher than
average rate of infection because
they've been close to
one who has actually got the infection
we know they've got the infection those
are the group part of the biggest risk
of unwittingly having an infection
without symptoms and then spreading it
for two or three days and then finding
their first symptoms in the place when
they're surrounded by colleagues and
friends and things so it is really
essential we do this if we wish to limit
the chains of transmission and this is a
key tool that will allow us once it's
fully operational gradually to reduce
some of the other onerous things for the
whole country but these people have to
do this for all of us it's - for all of
our benefits they're doing it to protect
their neighbors their friends and their
colleagues isn't it also right say Chris
that you can have the the virus and and
not have symptoms but also continue to
test negative it's so it is this case
that you can have the art the virus in
the incubation period this is the period
between catching it and first displaying
symptoms and indeed first living the
virus there's a period of time and if
you do a test in that period of time
it'll be negative correct negative and
you'll then go on to become infectious
and go on to infect other people so
that's that's a very key point about the
testing thanks very much Sam can we go
to Johnathan Riley from the Sun please
afternoon Primus that now the households
can travel across the country to meet
members of their family how long can
they stay there and can we say stay over
our parents house if we say Counting the
garden and are we able to say nip inside
to use the loo and when will we be able
to hug our close family again and
secondly to the scientist professor
whisky and Sue Patrick would you advise
them motorists to go on a 60 mile round
trip to test their eyesight right
Jonathan first of all were not there yet
and it's very very important that people
understand that the the really limited
nature of what we're saying we do want
people to be able to see their friends
and family we do want our people to be
able to see to grandparents
at once but it's got to be socially
distance there's got to be a maximum of
six people and no we're not encouraged
when we don't want people to stay
overnight and we don't people to go to
other households and and stay there
we're not I'm just afraid we're not at
that stage what what you certainly can
imagine is that there could be meetings
of families in a garden you could even
have a barbecue provided you did it in a
in a socially distance way provided
everybody washes their hands provided
everybody exercises common sense but I'm
grateful to you Jonathan for asking the
question because you know this is a
limited step forward we hope that people
will take advantage of it and and enjoy
the opportunity to see friends and
family a bit more but this is not a a
we're not saying that people should now
be allowed to to move freely across the
country and stay in you know in other
people's houses that is that is not
where we are yeah just to reinforce the
point which I think everybody knows but
it's worth reinforcing the two ways you
get infections are droplets from someone
it's someone coughing or seeing it was
speaking around you and that's why you
need to keep the two meters and the
second is through your hands and that's
why just to take the two example the
example that you raised an example the
Prime Minister raised if someone was to
go into the loo because they had to do
that to the toilet they have had to do
that absolutely critical that they wiped
everything down wash their hands all the
way through and secondly if you to do
something like a barbeque remember that
passing things from one person to
another if you haven't washed your hands
right you can transmit the virus that
way so it is your hands as well as the
distance are absolutely critical to this
bacteria need to add on barbecue baby if
you're gonna do things like that it's
got to be incredibly scrupulous and and
and careful otherwise really we risk
just transmitting that disease again and
we don't want that
Adam born from the New Scientist please
I the UK likely has more than 9,000 new
cases a day according to the symptom
tracker app that's being run by King's
College London which is obviously much
higher than the official 2300 a day
25,000 contact races sounds like a lot
but given their part time I wonder do
they really have the capacity to trace
all the contacts of those people and the
question for the CSI and the CMO
considering possible contacts would be
asked to look out for symptoms once it -
asks why is the UK still only listing 3
the symptoms trackers 17 and in the US
the Centers for Disease Control has 11
so it strikes me we might be missing
quite a lot of potential spread by not
listening more sorry Patrick you were
mine there are 25,000 tractors as
Patrick went on the numbers as I said in
my presentation actually if you look at
the ons survey I think the numbers of
new cases is closer to 8,000 or so or as
the King's app said 9,000 per day and
it's always been the case and I've been
very clear when I presented the slides
or the numbers testing positive on the
test that's clearly not the whole number
I mean there are people that you're not
picking up and that does well that's
what that discrepancy tells you so the
big challenge is to make sure that that
gap closes and you end up picking up
more and more and more of the cases that
are out there and quickly isolate the
contacts of those cases so that we have
an effective system and making sure that
that system is effective and that it
does identify the cases quickly and the
contacts go into isolation quickly and
that means ideally within 48 hours
that's the way in which we start to get
an effective system and you're quite
right that the system is under much more
pressure the higher the numbers so it's
much easier to run that system when you
have very low incidents in a country
than when you have higher numbers so
it's going to be more difficult at the
beginning and as numbers come down it
becomes easier so I add on the other the
other one which is the
list of symptoms so I think the thing to
understand with this is that the point
of having these symptoms that people can
remember the key thing is the fever the
new cough and the loss or change of
smell or taste those ones that we really
want to emphasize to the general public
is there are many other symptoms that
you can get with coronavirus it is that
it is a virus that can affect very many
parts of the of the body but if for
example all the people who have one of
the other symptoms always also have
fever there is no advantage to adding
that to the list of things we're talking
about and what we did and very able
colleagues in mine clinical public
health and science colleagues did is
they looked at all the early cases of
this virus in the UK also looked at the
international literature and looked at
all the symptoms were there and asked
the question are the people who if you
they didn't have they could have none of
initially the two symptoms fever and
cough and subsequently none of the the
other symptoms and what we found is all
the other symptoms tended to have one of
or more than one of those three symptoms
so therefore the sensitivity of this is
good the specificity is reasonable which
is why you then need to do a test so the
reason for this is you look at a symptom
cluster that predicts with a high degree
of sensitivity but a load of your
specificity what they are you accept
that for a doctor asking a history
that's a much longer list of symptoms to
talk about but for the key for almost
then you had a great great majority over
probably over 95% of people who have got
coronavirus with symptoms will have one
or one of those three and it's an all
not an and you have you can any one of
them and then you get tested thanks very
much Adam can we go lastly to Sam
McBride for the Belfast news newsletter
can I ask sir Patrick and professor
Witte first of all we've been told today
here in Northern Ireland that the our
number has been increasing and it's
barely beneath one night and should
people be necessarily alarmed by that or
could that be down to an increase in
testing or some other change to the
methodology in how that and figure is
being calculated and to the Prime
Minister
we knew that you're not going to sack
Dominic Cummings and we know that he is
not going to take what many of your
party colleagues believe would be the
Honourable course of resigning
but given that lives are at stake if the
public health advice here becomes
basically bastardized by the actions of
mr. Cummings
can you bring yourself to even utter any
words of criticism of how he has acted
given the gravity of the implications of
what has happened here do you does
anyone want to begin with the the are in
my notes it's remains below one
everywhere but you're quite right it's
very close to one in some places and
there may be both in terms of nations
but also in terms of places in in in in
it within those nations there may be
areas where the r is very close to one
and that's why as I laid out we've got
to be very cautious this is not a time
to say everything's okay we're releasing
measures everything's going to be rosy
it's a time to go very cautiously with
changes as they take place monitored
very carefully being prepared that there
will be local outbreaks because there
will be and being prepared that
therefore recommendations would come to
reimpose measures and I think that's the
world we're in and as I've just
described the numbers of cases remains
high it's not a low number so if the r
is one those numbers stay at that high
level whereas of course what we've got
to do is get them down so we need to
keep concentrating on our below one that
means making sure that the measures that
are in place are adhered to and that we
all stick with them to make sure that
the right thing is done and that the
numbers come down and that we end up in
a position where we can get the numbers
down
and the are down a bid but we're at a
fragile state yeah and Sam I want to
record that point entirely and just say
that the crucial message that I want to
give to you is that the British people
have made heroic sacrifices everybody
has taken steps to make sure that we get
this are done and drive down the number
of infections and no Sam I don't think
that people will respond differently I
think people will listen very carefully
to what the messages are I think you've
heard very clearly tonight from Sir
Patrick from Chris about the way forward
that we're taking everybody can see that
were taking some small tentative steps
forward in education in business and a
little bit to allow people to meet their
families and their friends again but all
of that is conditional progress and it's
conditional on our continued
determination to work to stay alert to
control the virus and to save lives
thank you all very much thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News